MS Analytics Class 2021: You didn't get anything that means I didn't know you needed the room, so you need to reach out to hobby awry.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because of covert and social distancing capacity is limited, so we are asking you to limit to two people two guests to come with you we'll talk a little bit more about that in a moment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But what's the purpose of these pure presentation one it's an opportunity for you to see other projects of students that were not in your group.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the rooms, that we have a signed or not by capstone coaches we've tried to mix you up so you can hear someone need that we hope that's fun and we want you to see the other methods, the final outcomes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: see what kind of other statistical modeling.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Things that your peers did what tools they use what they came up with, we are asking you to limit yourself to six minutes so there's about 12 or 13 people per each room.
MS Analytics Class 2021: multiply that time six and we're right at just over an hour, the people highlighted in yellow I have tapped to be our room Captain flash timekeeper So if you go over they will tell you they will cut you off you have six minutes so usually six minutes to say what you want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This these will be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: open to others to watch So if you have employers don't want to see your presentations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Remember, a long time ago we submitted employer contacts and so those were sent out if you have a family member that wants to sit in with you and watch these they're welcome to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, because of that we are recommending that you sanitize right, this is not the place to share your secret sauce so sanitized.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You don't have to share your output your secret factor your you know top three variables that impact, whatever you can say you know factor X y&z are the most important and leave it at that okay does that make sense to everybody sanitized protect your IP if you will.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again, you you just have six slides pick your best six but kind of describe what you did do you have a question quite.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, no worries.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So your slides are due by the 29th again that's right before finals.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can get that out of your hair it shouldn't be a lot of recreation you're basically taking your final capstone presentation cutting it down to your top six and then making sure it sanitize shouldn't be a whole lot of work going into this any questions about that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I am working on a program page with our student workers, this is kind of what it looks like so imagine we're here, for your presentations tonight and you want to remember who did what or what the name of their project was.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I need to know from you and I need to hear from you how many people do we have online to mind is everybody here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're missing quite a few people okay so tell your friends anybody that has anything that they don't want to share if you don't want to share the title.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Or the synopsis of what your project was about or the method that you use I need to know ASAP so like clay, I know we worked on an nda with you, I don't know if this is even acceptable or not, but I need to hear from you, if it's not okay so i'm going to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: send out what the student workers have put together so far I believe they grabbed these off of final capstone slides that came in send it out to you guys and see what needs correcting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On on these final methods that were used there's a lot of guesswork there and they're likely very wrong, so please correct us on that as well, so that's coming out to you and I need to know if there's anything you don't want to share.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is probably the most important piece of information for tonight, this is the WHO what where when of may 19.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, again it's analytics students and up to two guests per person and since do count towards your two guests rsvp is required for contact racing and there is an rsvp here and I need you guys to rsvp by May 14 if at all possible, I will fix this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it is going to ask for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Name email and phone number of guests it's also going to ask if they're flying in from another country, are they following CDC guidelines all of that good stuff it's all in an effort to keep everyone safe and healthy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in the event one of us falls ill will be able to to notify those that we need to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There is also a place for you to rsvp for people that want to join online, and that is the when you register them you'll put their email in there and that's all know who to send the URL to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It is your responsibility as a student, to ensure that your guests are symptom free not sick and not recently exposed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: make them aware of the mask requirements and social distance seating and if they're traveling from out of country that they're following the CDC quantum please.
MS Analytics Class 2021: dress is professional dress is recommended, because again remember this is followed by a graduation and award celebration, and which lots of photos will be taken.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And I do have a question about photos here in just a second, and also as a business school maze is particular about dress and they don't like to see shorts in jeans and tennis shoes at official functions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I have a dilemma on group photo so we can I need to vote and y'all can just.
MS Analytics Class 2021: put it in the chat shout outs, we might need help monitoring chat but anyways so we have an option to take a photo outside if we arrive early, so this would.
MS Analytics Class 2021: require everyone to show up on time right, so we can take a picture outside distance a little bit with no mass when there is sunlight right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Or we can take a picture at the end indoors with Max so indoor outdoor before or after I just know that if we do it at the end we'll have everyone there if we do it early we might have everybody in the photo.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With with time we take that this would come and do we start so we started six so we would have to get there by like 530.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And I don't know which way is his son his son coming in in the parking lot into the building.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't know I would rely on our photographer to tell me which side is in the game, but the sun really up it's gonna be pretty bright yeah and it's also with independence, yes, it is well, it depends right yeah.
But.
MS Analytics Class 2021: for whatever reason, I would say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm seeing a lot of outdoor I think yeah I would rather outdoor but it doesn't matter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we'll plan to show up about 530 for outdoor photo awesome.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So where are we doing this again we're doing it in the winter building, which is amazing Business School on campus the abbreviation, for it is this w CB and hopefully this takes you to the map okay so web, this is the building that we're in the 72 a lot is where you will be parking.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This Raymond states or parkway is university Dr.
MS Analytics Class 2021: any of you have been to campus you're just coming down university drive, so you till you get here and your turn.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay that's where we're going to be easy peasy Javier has arranged a parking code for y'all so you do not have to pay for parking and I think he's got.
That code ready to go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then accommodations is at the Hilton college station parking is free There we have one night reserved for you and Javier is also arranged three meal tickets for you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To be used at the hotel, so you can get dinner after on the 19th or breakfast that they before like really early before you go to graduation, or maybe something after graduation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Your choice, it should be pretty flexible it's not like a lot of money, but it'll get you something to to give you some sustenance and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you have a hotel reservation with us, we asked me not try to call and modify that but work with hot here on that because we do have them in a block and we want to make sure that we have the billing and all that sort of correctly.
Any questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I had notes and muted, let me check my i'm awake for questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Anything you're curious about but i'm not telling you.
Karen Fireman: Charles.
Charles Swanson: Charles for those individuals that will be presenting by zoom how that process occur.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sure, so we will send out a meeting link and we will all start out in the same room.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then write about six o'clock when are ready to break out into the presentation rooms, you know there's room 109 1114 115 will do breakout rooms within zoom.
MS Analytics Class 2021: After the Pier presentations are done at about 715 will bring everybody back to the main room and those that want to stay for the awards and marks and all that good stuff are welcome to stay and those that aren't can drop off.
Karen Fireman: My rents Karen on, so in that map picture that you showed us we're 72 a was the parking and that big wc BA was the.
Karen Fireman: Building that we're going to go into is there an entrance on one of the sides i'm not that familiar with campus so and also where we should meet at 530 if you can kind of point like which part of that building because it looks.
Karen Fireman: Like it takes about 15 minutes to walk around I know me i'll be alongside if I don't know which side to go to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah the beauty of it is the room that we're using is actually on that side of the building.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay.
Karen Fireman: we're we're going to be outside right at 530.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, at 530 So this is the parking lot there's an entrance right here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Raising.
MS Analytics Class 2021: entrance right here okay and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No matter which insurance you use, you will find us will have our student workers around, and we should be pretty easy to find.
Karen Fireman: It okay fantastic.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In there do siebel area right yes population that, on the other side, there is a busy, but on the other side.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So yes, that will be on the side yeah most likely will be right here outside the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Outside the entrance waiting for everybody and waving you down in the parking lot okay very good yeah.
graduation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: graduation on may 20 hmm they have not released that yet I do recommend you kind of monitor graduation that tammy.edu.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I know for the makeup one in spring, but they didn't kyle field, they originally said six guests and then like a week before they said Okay, you can bring 12 guests so somewhere between six and 12 maybe I believe a believer they said.
They would send us the tickets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That they will email you ate yes yep and did everybody also see that when you walk the stage is going to get an empty tube because they're mailing everyone's diploma so instead of trying to figure out and making people decide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's a lot of people will change their mind at the last minute right they'll say i'm coming and then at the last minute they're not coming, and then you have this pile of diplomas that you're like okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Did they pay did they not pay, so the university just said we're going to mail everybody and we'll do the ceremonial pander to that what that means is in howdy make sure your address is updated, because if they mail your diploma for the wrong address guess who's paying for the replacement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You are so.
Stephanie Pollock: it's not just updated through our profile.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It should be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It should be in howdy and you should be able to edit your address my information, yes, my information.
Between now and the 20th yes.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's also a clear bad policy that would be good for you guys to read this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: diaper bags they're pretty like they're clear bad policy is legit don't try to bring a diaper bag, even if you have kids you need a clear bad.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Number you know they may have emailed you guys I don't see a specific number on guests here.
This would be a good website for y'all to review.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you haven't ordered your CAP and gown yet you should do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you forget or you want to be a last minute Lucy you can do that too, and by one the tape of at the bookstore.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It will be wrinkled so you know when you get your CAP and gown we do highly recommend you kind of steam it press it make it look Nice that great your hat, if you want to all that good stuff.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you are a veteran they do have a special veteran cord red white and blue cord that comes along with a coin and Javier will be reaching out to you I believe he is arranged pick those up for everyone will be reaching out to you guys about that as well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Anything else i'm forgetting to tell you.
Amanda DePelsMaeker: right away, are we doing, are we doing a meal together beforehand.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We are not, unfortunately, with coven we didn't we could not find a facility or a venue or anywhere that was acceptable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To do that, that would meet our guidelines.
Amanda DePelsMaeker: Okay, thanks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Frequently Asked Questions there's one, it says, will take it to be required for guests, it says each graduate attending ceremony will be given tickets for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: faq section.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here clay, he said, under faq at said each son, will be able to bring a guest.
MS Analytics Class 2021: faq.
Karen Fireman: We needed which and page ticket for ourselves no.
MS Analytics Class 2021: streamed live through K me.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This morning.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to go ahead and jump right in, we will have a break kind of in the middle.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's my arrow is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So speedy see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But since i'm going to start off with review you don't need it, you can always just take a break, to leave it up to your personal discretion.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so we finished off lesson three lessons corresponding to the kind of chapters in the course notes and we're moving on into the second to last chapter or lesson on an injury mixing and your linear models today.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, in the last class, we talked about model modifications, we talked about the LP pre solver which is kind of an automatic modification that you don't ask for happens before your model goes to the solver solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Ideally, will be solving a problem with fewer variables and fewer constraints, but it produces a full solution to your model, including all of this suffix parameters okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right now, we just have the matrix or is it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Tomorrow is way down there okay grip.
Is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You see now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: fabulous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, you didn't miss anything yeah.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Probably just waiting to see how long I would go before you told me all right so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, and so the solution that you get back from the solver after the pre solver is a full solution it's got all the suffix parameter raised the dual values, everything is there, so it's it's only good it takes very little time for the pre solver to do its job.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we talked about some more intentional model modifications, some of which have built in tools and profit model we did a little bit on adding variables and constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The tools specifically relative to constraints were dropped and two variables fix.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And for all the changes or modifications.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You typically unless you do a lot of modifications will be better off using what I call re optimization which means.
MS Analytics Class 2021: optimizing starting from the solution to the original kind of based model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and
MS Analytics Class 2021: That can be just a few iterations or, if you have a lot of changes it might be my calf, as many as solving the problem from scratch, but it's typically is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A big advantage we've seen examples where we might consider multiple scenarios, so you just solved the model once and then you re optimize their after.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The way that you re optimized for linear programming models is you say solve with LP slash and then the solver option is called basis equals warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We also saw that in order to use the basis equals warm start option it's also important to turn off the pre solver so when you say basis equals warm start you also say pre solver equals none.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and any advantage, he would have gained from the pre solver is usually more than made up for by using the warm start.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and the last thing we talked about was kind of an ad hoc model modification, where I used this kind of if then else programming structure, not with statements, though with expressions, in order to handle special cases right, so you might have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Family of constraints or an array of implicit variables, you might want to have some special term added to one or more of those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so those were.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the second section of less than three then at the end of the class, we talked about network structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the way I kind of define network structure is if you're describing a problem that you're working on to someone else can you draw a little diagram with arrows and circles and your problem, probably has network structure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in pocket model, there is a special algorithm that's used for problems with network structure it's called the network simplex algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You call it just like you would the primal simplex solved with LP slash algorithm equals NS and as for network simplex.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when I told you, there are three algorithms for linear programming in the beginning, I actually live, this is another one right, but it would have been difficult to understand, without some of the context.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, and this is good for problems that you suspect have network structure, even if you don't know exactly what that structure is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because the beauty of the network simplex algorithm as implemented in pocket model is that it finds the structure and then takes advantage of it, as opposed to you're having to specify the structure in order to take advantage of it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There is a class of problems called peer network models, though, that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: are exclusively network structure and we talked a little bit about formulating those with these flow balance constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: took us a little time to kind of develop them and develop the way we would define the implicit variables for those constraints, but we'll see that we can take advantage of that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're going to talk at the end of the class today about a vehicle routing model and we'll see some of these network ideas pop up in there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so the last thing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When we developed our network model from the flow balance constraints, we ended up with what is called a trend shipment problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: distinction between a transportation problem or model and a trend shipment problem is that the transportation had basically.
MS Analytics Class 2021: a bunch of supply nodes and demand nodes factories and customers origins and destinations, whereas the trend shipment model has these intermediate nodes that just pass goods through that they're called trend shipment notes right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so what i'm going to talk about today is integer mixed integer linear programming models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'm going to start out in the way that i've done for linear programming to show you a small example, so we can kind of get our minds around it and see the concept behind the solution methodology for these problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is called a branch inbound algorithm i'll demonstrate it on a small problem, so you can see how it works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's another important concept that has allowed us to solve larger kind of industrial models this this notion of cutting claims on describe them and how they implemented within the context of the branch inbound algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'll kind of talk about how.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not only how they fit into the the solution methodology, but kind of how they're generated.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so as a reminder.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're talking about a mixed integer linear programming model or problem it's got a linear objective so sums of multiples of the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: linear constraints which you can think of as a system of equations and inequalities, possibly bounds on the variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For a mixed integer problem, some of the variables are required to be integer values we talked about the types of decision variables that might be integer value, so it could be a production variable where it's not a fluid it's a discrete item.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sometimes we can get away with if we're producing very large numbers just treating it as if it was continuous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if it's something like the McDonalds diet problem you can't really order 6.9.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Have a side salad so it's important to have integral values for the variables and sometimes these integral variables could be 01 or binary variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, where it's difficult to interpret what a half means in that context, do you, you know close half of the office and leave the other half open maybe not.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then integer linear programming model all the variables are required to be integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in some sense, because for each integer variable you can think of having at least two different choices right is discrete choices.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that it makes sense that the number of integer variables is kind of what drives the complexity of these models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And sometimes we can see what we refer to as a common atrial explosion, where the number of possible solutions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: increases exponentially with the number of integer variables not always but that's kind of worst case scenario that we, we fear and that's why.
MS Analytics Class 2021: how you can kind of think of the problems getting harder, as a number of your variables increases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the other hand, we've seen that for some models, we can solve very large models so in a pure network problem when the data is integer value the solutions are also integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So those can be very, very large integer linear programming models that solve very quickly, so it depends very much on the model itself and you don't always know until after you actually solve it, so what kind of the proof is in the proof in some sense.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me show you a small example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in this example, the decision variables are excellent, why.
MS Analytics Class 2021: they're both required to be integer, so this is an integer linear programming, or we call it, I LP problem doesn't have a business context i'm going to refer to as a problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just a simple numerical problem it's the coefficients are small, think about back to this, the two dimensional linear programming model we had we had bigger numbers in it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is so the action takes place on kind of a smaller stage right now trying to imagine what the set of feasible solutions for a problem, like this would look like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, because X and y are integer they're discrete points kind of like a lattice of points that satisfy some inequalities and so it's kind of like what we saw for linear programming, but then it's complicated by this integral piece, but we do look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A similar feasible region so we pick out just the linear constraints in the bounce so that determines the feasible region of a linear programming model or problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's what we call the linear programming relaxation, so what we relax is the gravity of the variables that's not ultimately our goal to solve that but that's kind of like a starting point right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Frequently when we want to try and solve a difficult problem we just relax some of the things that make it difficult, and then try and kind of add them back in in some way to find a solution, so the feasible region i'm going to show you in light blue.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is the feasible region of the linear programming relaxation meaning all of the inequalities, but not the integral it, so the blue is the feasible region of the LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And all the red points the integral points inside or on the boundary of the blue region are the actual feasible solutions that I want to choose between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So between these five points i'm trying to maximize that linear objective right just to remind you, because it's not going to be on any of the other slides six X plus five y right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is the problem that we ultimately want to solve, and you can kind of bet on one of these points i'm betting 00 is not the solution is probably one of the other points right but we'll see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as a first step, you kind of cross our fingers to everybody out there on zoom cross your fingers right, it will work better if we all cross our fingers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It sorry go ahead, it does not solve the model, so this is the solution to the LP relaxation but it's not one of the red points so what's wrong is the value of X is about 1.4 and why is 1.25 so as candidates for integers not so good right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there must have been someone in the back, not crossing their fingers maybe the next time we'll get lucky.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah well, it could be toes also.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what can we do well, one of the things to notice is that if we don't like the value of X being 1.4.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We could say well let's get rid of all the values of X that are strictly between one and two, that might look like this kind of this whole swath of points where the value of X is between one and two, and why can be anything we can eliminate all those points from consideration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Without throwing out any of the red points right because all the red points are either less than or equal to one or greater than or equal to two because they're integer value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I like to think of this as.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Using the lawn mower of death to just move through the feasible region and eliminate all those points in that Gray swath Okay, so you just have to remember this picture i'm not going to show the lawn morning slides.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so we're going to use the same technique, where we solve the LP.
MS Analytics Class 2021: relaxation, and hope that we find one of these red points as the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Unfortunately, again, even though the value of X is great X is 100 again, so this is 102 the value of X is one, the value of y is one and two thirds okay so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe getting closer in some sense but not quite there yet, so we can try and do the same thing we do with X, but now, with why so we'll just eliminate points where the value of y is strictly between one and two okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: narrows the choices that we have but also.
MS Analytics Class 2021: does something a little bit different in this case, so the first time that we mode through the feasible region we just mode some points off that off the boundary of the edge the here we kind of cut through the middle.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It may not be obvious, but it's certainly true that the feasible region of a linear programming model is connected.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the the Union of these two the triangle at the top and the square at the bottom can't be the feasible region of a single linear programming model alright, so we can't somehow magically optimize over this weird disconnected region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But what we can do is divide and conquer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's see so someone is asking.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah once we find the solution to the model we won't stop it won't keep exploring answer someone's question.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's see so we call these branches in our decision tree, so the first one might be this top part, so all the points were Why is at least to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think about it, every time we move through we kind of add inequalities, so the first inequality might have added would be X less than or equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, this is a set of points that satisfy my original inequalities and X less than equal to one and why is greater than equal to two i'm just calling it the branch, why is going to equal the two because this is the most recent decision that I made.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Likewise.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The square region bilos the branch where y is less than or equal to one right, this is, this is one zero for a while.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so i'll just intern solve those sub problems if you will.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's consider the one that we've got on screen, so this branch here solve the LP relaxation, and now, for the first time we actually get a solution that has integer values for both decision variables so X is one and why is one and our objective value would be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: six plus five or 11 right now is that the optimal solution to my original problem i'm not sure because there might be a better solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Up above in the triangle, but what I do know is that it's a candidate and so i'm going to kind of write it down and write down or remember the objective value and then, if I can find something better.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Today i'll forget about the first one, but otherwise this might be the, the best solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So kind of the give you a summary, I have a feasible solution and I know it's subjective value and i'm looking for a better solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's go to the branch on the top sell the LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: acts as a half.
MS Analytics Class 2021: wise to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that would be a half time six plus two times 1013 right 13 is better than 11 so that gives me hope that there might be a better solution somewhere in here, even if this is not going to be the solution because X is a half, so I mode again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it might seem like i'm done but actually this thin sliver here is still feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to solve the LP relaxation again now, I have the solution that X is zero and why is two and a third.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So five times zero plus six times, no sometimes six times zero plus five times two and a third who fractions 11 and two thirds right so it's still better than 11am I hold out hope but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to dash that hope against the rocks here in just a second.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the solution, I find is better than 11.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's integer solution, because the objective coefficients six and five are also integers it would have to be at least 12 be better than 11.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the best solution i'm going to find here is 11 and two thirds.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, because that was the LP optimal solution that's a bound on the objective value any point in that little sliver so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, I could keep exploring now it's pointless if my goal is just to find an optimal solution, even if this one is 11 it's not going to be better than the one i've already sound found and the job of the solver is to find an optimal solution so i'm done.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's a it's a divide and conquer strategy, but it's also dynamic in the sense that you don't know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How you're going to be branching this decision tree until you actually get in and start solving the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that's the we call the branch and down algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let me show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A tree showing all the kind of dis steps that we've made in our decision tree that we competed on the fly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This may seem like there are more sub problems, then we solve but the reason is because in a couple of cases we use our visual intuition, at a point where pocket model can't really see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me explain what I mean by that so here's the first solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The objective value is 16 X was 1.4 and why is 1.25 both X and y are fractional we chose to eliminate all the values of X between one and two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the two branches, there would have been X is less than or equal to one and greater than equal to two, we can see that there were no points to the right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so we didn't even bother saying anything about greater than or equal to two we didn't call that a branch even the profit model doesn't see that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it forms that sub problem, and if we were to solve it, it would find that it's infeasible which we did just by kind of visually inspecting and saying there's no points Okay, so it has to do a little more work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then it comes down to the second problem can see this solution here, the objective values getting smaller as we go down.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think about that doesn't make sense we are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Looking at a smaller set of points are maximizing or a smaller set of points, so we expect to see the objective value go down as we move down in the tree.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we picked a variable that it was fractional we branched so we kind of go around it down around it up and we eliminated all the points in between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, at this point, we have the solution that we first found our kind of incumbent or candidates solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Once we find that we can stop exploring kind of backtrack, because if we started branching more here, we would just find solutions that weren't as good.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we're not interested in that, for the same reason that we don't have to further subdivide when the problem is in feasible because we're never going to make it feasible by subdividing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we backtrack go to this problem here solution we found was X as a half we branched round down round up we didn't consider the points where X was at least one because we could see that it was empty but pocket model might solve that LP find it to be in feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then ultimately when it got to this point, it decided that were determined that it couldn't do better than 11 and it also stopped at that point.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is in computer science, this is called a tree, which is kind of weird you'd have to flip it to make it look like a tree, so this is what we call the root of the tree and trees go upside down in computer science right So these are the leaves here, and this is the route.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But a priori before we start solving the problem we don't know if the tree is going to be kind of like short and wide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or skinny and tall we don't really know how that explanation exploration is going to go or how many leaves it's ultimately going to have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We could we could bound it, but the boundaries so large that it's ridiculous, I mean if you look at the worst case possibility, you would never even try to solve problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so that that's how the methodology works for solving.
MS Analytics Class 2021: integer linear programming models, what about mixed integer linear programming models, but it's pretty similar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We just kind of have to keep track of which are the variables are allowed to be fractional and which ones, have to be integral so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We have some integer variables, we have some continuous variables we can't really expect the continuous variables to have any special properties, but we can expect the integral values to have integral.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Values integral variables to have integral values so let's just kind of generalized the rules, so if we get to the point where a sub problem, which would be an MIT LP.
MS Analytics Class 2021: has an optimal solution that's feasible for them, I LP then we be there, found a better manager solution or.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can keep our candidate as the best so far, so what is feasible mean here, the solution is already going to satisfy all the constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The question is whether it satisfies the restriction that the variables are integral so to see if it's feasible, we just have to look at the variables that are supposed to be integers and check that they are okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if it's not feasible, then there's going to be some what we call a branching variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that's a variable that's supposed to be integer value but it's fractional.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if it's not feasible, then we can find one of these branching variables and create new sub problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what about the printing part problem isn't feasible, we can print it that's exactly the same condition.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If a sub problem has a bad about that's not better than the best solution, we found so far, which we call best integer just a value that we keep track of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in our previous example the best integer value would have been 11 because that was the value of our candidate, so if it's not better than that, then we can stop exploring because we're just looking at inferior solutions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we're done when all of the active sub problems that we've created through branching are solved so you can think of it as ultimately either they are going to be in feasible they're going to have a feasible solution or they're going to get.
MS Analytics Class 2021: shown to have a value that's no better than the one we found so far.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's a little complicated maybe but i'm going to do an example and work through it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is the mixed integer linear programming problem i'm going to solve, so this is our objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'm not going to expect you to remember this, but we're going to solve the problems in pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So to constraints everything's non negative and two of the variables are integer X one X, to the other two variables why one and why to are allowed to be continuous So if I just kind of type this model in and left out the integrity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the optimal solution or an optimal solution is the following X is two and three quarters.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Why to zero, I want to zero, and why two is one and a half, and if you calculated the objective value from this objective function, you get 12 and a quarter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as a first step, because it's not feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What can we choose as a branching variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I can look in the chat or you can say it either way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: two choices are X one X to y one or two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: X one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: X one is a good choice because it's fractional right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Excuse me.
MS Analytics Class 2021: anyone else, want to make a suggestion, or are you all good with X one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: next to it, we wouldn't be able to get make any progress because remember what we do and we choose evaluate as we round up and round down X two is already integer value, so we will be cutting out anything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The only one that looks plausible is why to remember the y variables aren't required to be integers so they really only choice we have here is X one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me just go into broke up model and finished solving this so kind of what and the start if I started drawing a tree, it would look something like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In each of these squares i'm really only need to draw or to annotate or to to keep track of the values of X one X two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because we know we're never going to branch on why wouldn't why to their values are going to be there, but just not be displayed so initially my problem has 12 and a quarter, these are the values of X one X two X one is chosen for branching and I wrote it down and rounded up okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm going to do is i'm going to do this inside pocket model but i'm not going to let pocket model solve the problem by just saying solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to look at the LP relaxation and solve all of them, as I go into the branching on the variables okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there could be a different points in time, like even now, I could I could explore this one first or this one first so just to kind of keep us on track.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What i'm going to do is i'm always going to go to the left i'm going to choose a smaller value first and i'm going to i'm going to dive.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to do kind of a depth for search because i'm going to try and discover an integer solution or a feasible solution as quickly as possible, because that will allow me to eliminate things okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me go in and you might want to keep.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some of the slides back so you can refer to them as we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Doubtless i'm probably going to have to start a new session anyway.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're in the demos for lesson for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, we will be in the demos yeah you get it okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so this one's called.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's see Am I LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's the variables X and y they're all non negative there's the objective there the constraints, but notice that there's nothing to distinguish the fact that X one X two or integers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first thing I would do is I was at add the constraint, or the bound next one is let's see where our choices were less than or equal to two right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm just going to go into the declaration statement and add less than or equal to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, and then i'll solve it using pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, if you in the inner inner sanctum of the solver would probably be re optimizing i'm just going to solve them all from scratch shouldn't make a difference because it's only for a very small solve like the win.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let's look.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's our solution now notice the objective value is gone down right as you move down the tree, we expect that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's the values of X and y have I found a feasible solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not as such right because the value of X to stubbornly is not integer value so since i'm doing like a depth for search on now continue to branch soul branch on X to realizing that i'm still I got some things to clean up after i'm done i've got another node out there, waiting for me.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when I branch onyx to it's going to be less than or equal to zero or greater than or equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll go back and i'll start with less than or equal to zero so X two is less than or equal to zero that in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A new number 09 okay so as I go down I keep adding bounds, you can see that X to being less than or equal to, and greater than or equal to zero is actually going to be fixed and eliminated by the pre solver something we talked about yesterday, so should solve even faster than 0.00 seconds.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's see what we get for a solution jack devalues 10.
MS Analytics Class 2021: haha it's feasible, right now, as I mean we're done.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No, because we love some areas unexplored whose bounds are bigger than 10 right, but this is the solution that's so far as the best that we found so we'll keep track of this and we'll backtrack.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So last thing we did we added X two is less than or equal to zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The other side of that is greater than or equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So put greater than equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: solve that one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: See if it's an integer solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh draft is not an integer solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and its objective value is also bigger than 10 now, you could say, well, it is not 11 we can quit now well when we have a mixed integer linear programming model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We don't always have an integer value objective right because those fractional guys have objective function coefficients we can't use the same trick, we have to get actually below 10 for 10 or below.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, well, so we go back down X one is less than or equal to one or greater than or equal to two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when it's less than or equal to one let's come back code what happened where'd my co go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh, I see here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So next one, is what I say, less than or equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's change that upper bound to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: don't worry it's not going to take forever.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's not going to do solution but it's less than 10 right, so we can prune this one stop exploring.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Go back we'll backtrack.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Instead of less than or equal to one now it's going to be greater than or equal to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now you can see that the value of X one is going to be fixed it to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: solve that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's less than 10 right turns out this as an integer solution but it's worse than the one we already have, so we can again stop exploring okay so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All the way back to the top right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we'll go all the way back to where it is everything is non negative.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we'll look at X one is greater than equal to three.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now I don't know if it'll end here, where we'll keep going all the way to the bottom, on this one, too, we just have to explore.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 11 and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's it's an integer solution, so we don't have to explore anymore and it's better than what we already had so that's the optimal solution rather that's an optimal solution Okay, so let me show you the tree.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we again explored to the left and down so it's 01 to backtrack 234 backtrack to five and backtrack to six.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see that in fact we found three feasible solutions and the best one we found in the very last step.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, what if we had chosen to go to the right instead of to the left.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then we would have found this one right away.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We were still had to explore this, but then we could have stopped and not explored these two parts at the bottom.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it should convince you that the way that we explore can affect how many solutions or how many problems we ultimately have to solve, and the best strategy is to find a good image or solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: quickly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But when we can't see anything on the outs from the outside, we really don't know what a good strategy is fortunately profit model has all those things embedded in it solver you don't have to make those decisions, this is just how the method works, it has rules for deciding.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which variable to branch on and which sub problem to tackle next right and the rules are chosen because they work well on the average.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's the branch inbound algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, I said that well, so this has been around kind of forever like since the early 60s and people could easily formulate interesting problems scheduling problems routing problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All kinds of interesting problems they were just too big to solve, because there were so many sub problems that are generated that it would just basically run forever or you would you would fall asleep wake up the next morning, it would still be running and you haven't found anything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we couldn't solve the like big industrial problems that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: were important to self so this next notion is really allowed people to solve much larger problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The idea is called cutting plane.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's kind of a way, like the branch inbound strategy of eliminating points from consideration by morning through the feasible region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: same idea we cut points we always kept points off the edge of the feasible region so same idea cut off some points that we don't have to worry about them, we don't consider them and the easiest way to see what it is i'll just show you a picture and then i'll go back to the definition.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's our feasible region suppose we solve the LP relaxation there's a point right here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is an example of a cutting plan it cuts off this point cuts off the purple point but it preserves all of the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: feasible solutions to the integer linear programming model right that we cut those points off, we could be cutting off the optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want to cut off some of the feasible region, and one way to guarantee that we do, that is to make sure that we cut off the current best solution that we found so far that's what a cutting plan does.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It cuts off the solution to the LP relaxation the purple point it is satisfied by all the feasible solutions to the Am I healthy right doesn't cut off any of the red points, in other words in the diagram.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So they strengthen the relaxation right because the more points we cut off the smaller the objective value kind of closer we get to the red points that are on the inside, I like to think of the following maybe you remember the movie the matrix the first one, the good one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's a scene, where where neo and trinity are in a car under a bridge and it's raining there's a couple of like other characters in the car and he's got this bug.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This like metallic scorpion the thing that's inside them and they want to get rid of it, so the one of them turns around they got this thing it looks like a huge ping pong ball sugar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And those like trying to extract it using this strange looking machine and the idea is that if it's close to the surface it's easy and relatively painless to find it in extracted.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if its way down deep in their neo is going to be hurting do right, so the idea of cutting planes is to cut the points from the outside, to expose the red points make them closer to the surface and easier to find.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it turns out to be a wildly successful strategy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I like to think of it as never john belushi with the old samurai old Saturday night live, you probably didn't see them when they were broadcast that you've probably seen reruns so the ideas cutting point right so i'm going to test you here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In a minute i'm going to show you some examples and ask you if they're cutting edge or not, but the good news for you is you don't have to find them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is what I refer to as the optimization fairy The outcome is a optimization very will find the cutting things for you actually it's it's it's part of the code for the solver right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you don't have to find them it's just helpful to understand what they are, as part of the solution process we'll see when we get to the iteration log that understanding that log kind of means that you have to understand what these cutting planes are doing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It has a lot of techniques for generating these cutting planes and if you are an expert you could kind of read up on and figure out what the different types are but for most of us will just let it happen in the background and just trust the optimization fairy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me give you a couple of options, so you can see this, this is an exercise on page 425 but i'm going to show you all the important stuff.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here's the same situation here's the LP optimal solution, so a feasible region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's a potential cutting plane, the equation of this inequality is X plus y is less than or equal to three, is it a cutting plane, no, no, no.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No i'm so so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The two things we have to check for his first that it cuts off the purple point oh failure right off the top of the BAT right because he doesn't cut off anything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, not a cutting fine alright, so let me give you another one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is two X plus y less than equal to four is this a cutting plane.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, i'd say yes cuts off the purple point right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Cut off any other read points, yes, so that's a cutting plane okay that one works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One more comment warrior.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This one is X plus four wires less than equal to six, is this the cutting point.
MS Analytics Class 2021: He is a little aggressive you might say, it does cut off a purple point but it cuts off the red point now, you could say, well, the Red points, not the best solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I don't care if I cut that off well I could change the objective function coefficients just a little bit and make that the best solution so that is also not occurring right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again, the idea is for the cutting planes that cut off points off the outside and when we do this, cutting is before we start to branch, so we say, instead of branching right away, because this is not an.
MS Analytics Class 2021: integer solution let's add this cutting plane and then re optimized so that the next optimal solution could be here, or could be here, and you can see that cutting off all these blue points is going to make the bound better so it's going to get us closer to the points on the inside.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, depending on what the cutting plan is sometimes you get an immediate short term benefit, but sometimes the points you cut off are more of a kind of a long term benefit by go back a couple of slides to our example here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we optimize adding this cutting plane, you probably get this point, right here, not much of a difference, by the time we get to the top triangle it's just a single point so there's a short term game and a long term gain by adding is cutting points to the mall.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: seems like we've got a kind of a long time we haven't solved any problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that's probably the next step.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I don't want to bypass the question that slide says questions without checking to make sure that anyone has any questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay that's good.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's talk about how we can solve these problems, in particular, probably the most important thing is how do we tell the compiler that our variables are injured that's probably job one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're going to solve some problems I my goal is like kind of next goal is to solve the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With integer decision variables and then we'll also get into the SAS log and try and kind of understand how that informs the solution process.
MS Analytics Class 2021: OK, so the answer the first question is pretty simple if you have variable that you want to be integer it's just a fun fact.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So far, the fun facts that we've talked about our bounds, but now the new fun fact is either integer or binary.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so binary is a special kind of energy variable it's just zero or one, so you can formulate your model as a linear programming model and just and just paste an integer on to the declaration statements and off you go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm kind of describing this in the context of what looks like a network.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we have nodes like we had before, and then these sometimes they're called edges or links is kind of a neutral term because you know they don't have an arrow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think of this as maybe some kind of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Inter office video conferencing network OK, so the nodes might be different departments or different buildings and these links are kind of communication links and the integer variables might correspond to adding additional capacity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To make the communications go faster on the links in either direction and then maybe at the nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You might have a binary variable for some kind of like a super switch that you know transmits incoming.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Faster if it's routing from say the line Green Group today yellow group might have to go through a couple of these here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So both different ways that we could speed up transmission in this inner office network, maybe we're doing something like minimizing latency some objective like that, but you can see that some of the variables makes sense to be integers and some makes sense to be binary.
MS Analytics Class 2021: don't worry we're not going to solve the world's problems here is just to illustrate of example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So for us when we're doing the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can imagine that adding one of these two fun facts to our decision variables, will allow us to make a minimal change the model and get a more realistic solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so now, you could say okay let's do it let's get in there and do it to say solve integer solve well, the problem with that is that oftentimes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We don't find the optimal solution and I don't mean that, in the sense that the guys at SAS are knuckleheads and they can't figure out how to find the optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's kind of like diminishing returns, in the sense that maybe we find a solution, this when 10% of optimal in the first hour, and the second hour it goes down to 5% and then 1% and then a half percent and if you really wanted to get all the way to optimal you might have to wait a month.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But oftentimes you're satisfied to get a solution that's just very close to optimal in the sense that it's provably within a certain percentage of optimal.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like if it's within point oh 1% of optimal and you're not willing to spend a tremendous amount of time finding the exact optimal solution so How does that work, how can we prove that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We have this best integer that's the objective value of the best solution, we found so far.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we were maximizing it's less than or equal to the optimal solution right because it could be better than the one we've already found.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you look at all of the active nodes all the nodes that we haven't been able to prune.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and looked at the bounds, and all those nodes and if we're maximizing take the biggest of those that would give us what we call it best bound, like the worst case scenario.
MS Analytics Class 2021: has to be at least as good as best integer but it can't be as can be better than the best bound, but it's probably somewhere in between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: At any rate, the difference between those two is a bound on the absolute gap.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In our objective can be better than that much Okay, and if we divide by the best found we get down on the rail to there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, as we go through the solving the problem we kind of are always updating the value of best integer and best bound, and so we always have this relative gap.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And when it gets small enough will terminate, even if we haven't found the optimal solution or if we found the optimal solution we just don't know it, yet you can't prove it yet.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, and it turns out that the default is 10 to the minus fourth, which is point 1% so, even if we solve the McDonalds problem does not a big problem we might not find the optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With the default values of all the solver options okay just a warning because you know might be disappointed if we get there and it's not the best solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me illustrate that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With our branching tree let's say we stopped as soon as we found the best the first.
MS Analytics Class 2021: integer solution which is the one that had objective value 11 here's the rest of the tree that we've explored and this unexplored known since we haven't solved the problem on it, it just has the bound from its parent.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To the best integer is 11 the best bound the biggest bound at any of the other unexplored parts is 14 a third that would say that the relative gap is 23%.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're probably not satisfied with that that's not a great bound, we will explore more and as we explore the best integer could be getting bigger and the best value will be getting smaller until we reach a point where we can terminate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's typically how we terminate, but there are other criteria.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because these problems can be so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: hard to solve we give ourselves other out so here's their relative jeopardy relative objective gap when I just illustrated.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There was also an absolute injected gap which is less than 10 to the minus six that terminates but depending on the problem that you're solving these other things could come into play.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So maybe you have a solution like something that you did last month and you said, well, what if we tried, the same thing well if anything is worse than that solution you already know, you can say i'm not interested there's a cutoff value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As a target, you could say, well, if I can do 10% better than what i'm doing now i'm good with that so i'll set a target and if it can achieve that it'll stop.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You might say run for an hour and show me, the best thing you found or if you're concerned about solution storage space, you could say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: don't generate more than like 10,000 nose, and this is a little tricky because a priori you don't know how much storage spaces associated with each sub problem, the best way to figure that out is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: run until you are out of memory and then figure out how kind of backtrack and say oh that was too much.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there are various strategies that we can employ that allow us to kind of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Exit gracefully when we try and solve the problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so now we're ready right now that i've set you up for disappointment, we can try and solve the mcdonald's problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's go in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this one is called mcdonald's INT for integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's the kind of the last mcdonald's model that we considered, so it has.
MS Analytics Class 2021: bounds of two on the foods has this the sauce constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: toppings the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: calories from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and then it has the kitchen sink in the sense that we drop the upper bounds on the condiments and drinks, it has all those things i'm adding even adding.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just for you, because you're my special friends dollar menu pricing okay so has everything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So now, when we say solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: see what kind of model we're solving go back to the declaration of the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: declared to be in injury OK.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the solve here we'll use the the solver that's used for integer and mix integer linear programming models let's go ahead and just let it run.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so now we investigate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see that the number of variables here you have 63 variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: they're all integer variables, some of them are bounded below some their bounded above.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and below and above.
MS Analytics Class 2021: $8 and 67 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It found an optimal solution, so the gaps that are reported here are the gaps between the the best in your solution, and the best bounce so they're identical so we we actually did solve it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see something about the solution process here, this is the number of nodes in the decision tree 280.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The iterations is all of the iterations of the simplex algorithms combined over all of the sub problems that we solve see if you divide iterations by nodes it gives you a rough idea of how many iterations per sub problem is less than 10.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's all pretty quickly and here's our solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can check that it satisfies all of our conditions, you know count the number of drinks we're not getting any chicken nuggets we got no sauces see we get.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We get one side salad and we're getting crude times.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we seem to be obeying the restrictions here.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: These are kind of a vestige of solving it as.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just changing it by putting energy we still got our table here, and you might say, well, wait a minute there no dual values and, if we look down here reduced costs it's even stranger because they're missing values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So do you remember what dual values tell you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It says, if you change the limit of the constraint by a small amount how's the objective value change.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's think of it in the context of an integer linear programming model right we've got red points inside the blue region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what's going to happen as you move it out or in it's either going to have no effect because it doesn't cut off any of the red points or it's going to cut off one and they'll kind of have a more extreme effect.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's not a continuous change so there's not really a notion of a slope here for integer linear programming model, so there are no dual values to report and that's why they're important as missing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah a step function yeah it is really just here yeah So if you can't really far away and look at it, it might look smooth but up close it's a step function.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah, and the reason that they're missing from the table above and what they're blank and the table above has to do with the conditions we used to print them they're actually would be missing also if it hadn't been for the weird print statements that we use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so in your mission and your linear models don't have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Dual values so it's it's it's kind of bad because we've seen that dual values, give us a lot of useful information about the model itself but we can't expect them in this class of problems.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because i'ma show you a few more slides and then we're going to do a break.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not me, you may have heard does break out, no just break so tonight is just a break, no breakout session.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, just like the linear programming solver the Mr LP solver and you may not have noticed, but even though that was an integer linear programming model, the McDonalds model, the solver was called the MIT LP solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we just go back and show you that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we go back to the solution summary table.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The solver is called the MIT solver and the algorithm is called the branch and cut algorithm so we talked about the branch and bound algorithm if we look in the log file here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see from the solution log.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That we're actually branching and cutting so here is the root node node zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The first thing it does is it does a trivial bound by just looking at the ignoring the constraints, the second one is that the LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in between each of the lines in this first root node section it's adding cutting planes so souls LP relaxation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: ads cutting planes cells LP re election as cutting planes that does that all the way down to this line here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When it sees that it's not making significant progress and select between these last two solutions there's not much change, then it decides okay i'm done cutting i'm going to branch it gives you a little summary of what it was able to find it added and kept six cutting planes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and thereafter, it does exactly the same thing, so it branches cut cut cut cut cut branch qat qat qat qat qat branch it just doesn't show you the detail, except that the root node because that would be an incredibly long output if it showed you all that detail on all the nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All it shows you is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When something exciting happens and for the MIT solver something exciting is when it generates a new manager solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so here is $9 and 33 cents to find a new one it's 899 found another one so whenever it finds a new solution, it shows you how close it is to terminating by showing you what the value of best integer best bound and the relative error.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you get into the second part, it will show you a little bit more detail.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Using this log freak parameter, but we never got that far in the problem that we solved.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so like the LP solver before it goes to the Mr LP solver it tries to cut it down to a smaller problem, using a lot of the same ideas, but some more involved ones.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because it can afford to spend more time in the pre solver because it's going to take more time to solve the problem, but the idea is the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So some of the options that we had for LP like primal and we still have here i'm sorry pre solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we can control the pre solver we could turn it off.
MS Analytics Class 2021: log freak.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see that, by default it's every five seconds, which explains why we didn't see any intermediate reports because it took zero seconds to solve the McDonalds problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can set it as low as one second but it wouldn't help because it's solving zero seconds, some of the other ones that some are pretty interesting, some of them are kind of esoteric.
MS Analytics Class 2021: primal in is the way that you do worm starts for integer and mixed integer linear programming models, it allows you to input values for the decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And before it starts to branch and cut algorithm it says okay i'll plug those values in and see if it's feasible if it is there's your there's your candidate there's your best manager otherwise i'll just do my deal.
MS Analytics Class 2021: heuristics so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It generates integer solutions, both by solving the LP relaxation and getting lucky, but also by running heuristics in the background what's what would be what would be a heuristic.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, we are these fractional solutions in what integer values, so you can imagine that does a lot of rounding creative rounding created around it was kinda like creative accounting, so it sometimes it's able to find solutions using heuristic methods that run in the background.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And restarts in summary symmetry there, these are a little bit more advanced.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe we'll talk about these we run into them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here is the risk reward quiz right So if you can tell me two options that are common to those two solvers we'll go to break.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I should say when when cuz i'm it's just a matter of time right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I think, to have him.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do I see the list again.
Karen Fireman: yeah.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, what would be one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So not not necessarily works exactly the same, but has the same name basically works as similar way.
Wright, Beth: To resolve resolve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: resolve or is is good for both okay any other ones and restart restarts not so much, no, no official it may be, but I don't think there is a restarts options for.
The LP solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You want to hit well symmetry know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If it ends in a queue is that a good hint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah so So what we even though it measures something slightly different it's it's the same idea every so often we show you intermediate Progress Report same thing for the LP solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we'll stop there, and take a break let's take a break for 10 minutes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we'll we'll finish up okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Help yourself to some of the brisket out in the lobby.
MS Analytics Class 2021: develop any new tools, so to speak, i'm going to talk about some different modeling tricks or techniques that are useful when we have binary variables and we'll look at maybe three different.
MS Analytics Class 2021: models that i'll demonstrate for you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and
MS Analytics Class 2021: The hey Mike.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Two of them will present larger problems, because I think it's um it's dangerous to just solve these problems that all solved and 0.00 seconds gives you the illusion that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Either all problems solve that quickly or or kind of you don't have a good feel for what could constitute a larger scale model how that might look when itself.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: different kind of logical constraints that we can model using binary variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And one type of cost structure that I want to look at in particular is a fixed cost structure so that's, the first thing I want to look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here is you could think of maybe we have a linear programming model, and we want to try and incorporate a fixed costs for one of the variables so think of X is being one of the variables in our existing model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we'd like to have a cost structure that if X is zero is zero and if X is positive is some fixed costs, plus a linear cost alright so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Different than the kind of cost structures that we can capture you know linear programming model, but nonetheless a cost structure that we might run into in practice right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to be a little sloppy here in the following sense that my decision variables are just lowercase instead of following the conventions, because these are our typical variables, we all know and love X, Y and Z.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And for my parameters i'm using capital letters which is also a no, no, but since i'm using small letters for the decision variables now i'm just throwing caution to the wind here so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: F is the fixed costs that represents the the the gap here are the height and see is the slope of the linear part alright, so I want to capture that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What i'm going to do is i'm going to introduce the binary variable Z so binary again is your one and it's going to help me distinguish between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: X being zero or X being positive.
it's still not translating.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh, I can't see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No, no, no.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sorry inside joke right so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to introduce some new constraints that model, the relationship between X and Z and argue that it actually works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so, if you look at the objective here my cost is going to be the linear part is going to be carried by X and the fixed part is going to be carried by this new binary variable Z.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, in order for this trick modeling trigger technique to work, I have a priori new abound on the continuous variable X.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So be for bound.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think of some of the problems that we saw up to this point, like the McDonalds problem or the furniture making problem they may not a priori have a bound on the variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But typically if it doesn't have a bounce To begin with, we can somehow computer bound from the problem data so in the furniture making problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We looked at how many desks with the most desks, that we can make we compute a bound on that hundred and 12 and a half right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It didn't a priori have a bound, but we could calculate one from the problem data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this bound enters into one of the constraints that we use that relates, the binary variable on the continuous variable it's the continuous variables that most the bound times the binary variable, and so let me try and argue that this works okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what happens when X is positive right so when X is positive, we want to be on this curve part I mean the this straight line part of the graph here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's look at this and turn it the other way around let's it's, this is a bound on X in terms of Z let's try and rewrite this in terms of a bound on Z in terms of X, so let me see if I can.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do annotating magic here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so in terms of Z and I realized it can't see this until I finish typing Z is greater than equal to, it would be one over B.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Times X.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's turning it around to be an inequality in terms of abound on Z so if X is positive.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then, regardless of how big this be is i'm sorry I should have put a capital B I don't know if I can recover that I don't think I can gracefully anyway.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is going to be positive times X, which is positive, so Z is greater than equal to any positive number, then it has to be one it can't be zero so if X is positive Z is one and that's what that was we want, in this case, because if X is causing we want to add the fixed costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Ultimately, probably to be able to our objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, what about a Z if X is zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If X is zero this is Z is greater than or equal to zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so that allows for Z to be either zero or one, but if we're minimizing costs we're going to choose a small value to see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That means that if X is 00 will be zero and effects is positive Z will be one because that's exactly the relationship that we want to hold and that will mean that this correctly computes the cost this fixed costs, regardless of the value index.
MS Analytics Class 2021: excusing at the price of adding additional binary variable to our model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So for every variable X, that we want to attach a fixed cost to it's going to cost us an additional variable or model and it's an additional binary variable so it could add.
MS Analytics Class 2021: layers of complexity, to the solving of the problem Okay, it might take us from a linear programming model to a mixed integer linear programming model that could be much harder to solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I like to illustrate this and I did mention that, for the furniture making problem we calculated bounds on the continuous variables, the non prod variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it might not make sense to think about a fixed cost in in that problem what might make more sense to do is to look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A fixed time, let me just clear the annotations here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm going to look at is i'm going to look at setup times so What this means is that if you are producing chairs and you want to switch production over to desks, you might have to adjust the machines.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because they might have to have parts that are the same size same length whatever and so it'll take some time to switch over from production of shares production of desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that's what I mean by a setup time thinking setting up all the machines in order to make a certain type of product.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it may be the case that in our furniture making company, I can observe this and if I include it then I have a more realistic model of the business problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's go in and do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: furniture yet another furniture problem called furniture setup.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you look at the data sets that we read resource data and product data it's probably been a while, but if we look at product data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We had open that before I believe.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whether or not we opened it before notice that it has a column called so time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we read this data set before we just ignored it we don't have to read all the columns in the data set you just tell it what data you're interested in all right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, but in this case we're going to read the setup time so that means that if we want to make bookcases it's going to take half an hour to get the machine setup to make bookcases and then we can fire off a few bookcases and then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: decide what we want to make next whether it's bed frames or chairs and desks, and so they might be an incentive to make fewer different types of products, because then there will be fewer setup times involved okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's look at our furniture setup.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I have two different types of variables now my my num prod variables correspond to the X that we had in our example there the continuous variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the any prod just says, do I make any of this particular product, those are the binary variables and we want to set up a relationship that when non prod is positive than any problems one, and we know i'm proud of zero than any product zero Okay, because that will allow us to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: attach that setup time when appropriate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so remember that we.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Calculated here, I can find this where is it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Before we had calculated the bounce on the decision variables and store them in non prod ub that parameter rain, so I can use those then in the type of linking constraints that I had that involved to be bound that bound is non prod data for be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me show you what that looks like I have called it, linking that's not a magic name it's just a name that kind of to me conveys what it's doing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But you can call it Fred if you want it would still work if you called it budget, you might have some issues but Fred would be fine.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it says that non prod that's the continuous variable is that most non prod upper bound, which is the parameter the bound plans any product.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Any product is the binary variable so that's the that's the same as X is less than or equal to be times the same idea, except for now we have that one for each product.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, that links them up to correctly, now we got to think about how how set up time will impact our model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what is it going to eat into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: production.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or in this case, what we call a Labor Labor right, so we have a certain amount of Labor that's available and we're either using it to make things or now, in this case we're using it to set up the machines.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's going to it's going to impact the usage sure doing this early ever going to have one set of time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's one one per type of item, yes, so if we look at in mount used if we're looking at amount use the Labor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then for product P, we want to add in setup time times any product so since any product is a binary it'll count the setup time have any type of product that we make, or we choose to make but it's only going to factor into Labor right it doesn't doesn't affect metal doesn't affect what.
Products.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And because that additional term is in the amount used of Labor it's good it's wrapped up into total cost and into my objective and everywhere else okay again using implicit variables means that I don't have to make the change in in multiple places.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I solve the problem now, I want to look at both the non prod variables and the any prod variables, to make sure that they got correctly assigned to what i'm printing at the bottom is the number on the bound on non prod any any product Okay, so let me Let me run the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again, this is still a very small model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just to illustrate this type to eight variables for binary and then for will be continuous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: binary also Councils bounded above and below because it's greater than equal to zero less than or equal to one an integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's an LP we have integer and we are binary and continuous variable so it uses the branch and cut solver I mean sorry the branch and cut algorithm and my LP solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The objective value is 17 94.2 women that's less that's less than 18 41.5, this is a better model and it's giving me a worst answer, how could that be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well it's more realistic right that's the sensing which is better it's not finding better solutions it's just finding things that model my business problem better so found an optimal solution, you can see here that the gaps are zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What about the feasibility is what are these mean final and feasibility we've talked about that, before there's this one of the constraints violated by a very small amount.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, if you were looking at the solution here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: These variables and these values here, and you, you computed the usage of everything in the constraints you wouldn't see that violation at all, you might say, well where's it come from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Remember you're only seeing so many significant figures in the nonprofit values, so it might be coming from those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It might also be coming from any product values that are very close to one are very close to zero, and that sounds weird if they're integer they should be zero that should be one those the only choices right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, go back to the in the in feasibility is there's something called integer and feasibility.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That sounds like a really, really weird thing think about how the branch and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: branch and bound algorithm works, we sell the LP relaxation we check to see if the solution is integer or in this case integer in the right places.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, what if it's 1.0000003 is that an integer well technically no but we're using floating point arithmetic.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we kind of have to establish some small tolerance for okay we'll call that an integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's what the energy feasibility is so there's some tolerance like 10 to the minus six if we're close enough to an energy we just say oh heck it's an integer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so not only can the non prod variables, be very slightly different than these values the any prod decision variables can be slightly different from these values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that explains the Kremlin feasibility the bounded feasibility that's pretty obvious what that is and the integer and feasibility, which is new and kind of strange.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again, the solution process one node 45 iterations not a lot of branching involved here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's our solution to a precinct bed frames and bookcases and you can see that those any prod variables are one no chairs no desks the any product values of zero so it did correctly match them up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's good.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As before, we're not using all the available metal.
MS Analytics Class 2021: can look at the long film but it's not going to be so terribly interesting here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because, since there was only one node you can see, the problem is solved without any branching at all right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is it found an optimal solution at the root node it just added cutting planes and then it found the optimal solution.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Questions about.
Karen Fireman: But yeah it's it's Karen Dr hurt them back up a second where you right where a second ago slide that back.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You want to see the code.
Karen Fireman: where he wants you to log.
Karen Fireman: log OK OK so it's like that up so okay now, what are we seeing here i'm not following that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so so here's where we start using the branch circuit algorithm.
Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: At the first node zero is the root node.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Meaning right now branching it's just the original model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We solve it looks like it's getting us the LP relaxation in the first note here.
Karen Fireman: yep.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then in between the lion the next line it adds some cutting planes and you can see the bound improves because he cut some of the blue points off the edge of the surface.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that when we optimize over that smaller region we get a better balance and then we keep adding more and more cutting planes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and the bound keeps getting better and in the background heuristics are running generating new solutions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And every time we find a new solution, you can see, the objective value improves the gap is getting smaller because the best manager is getting bigger and the boundaries getting smaller.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, hopefully eventually they'll get close enough that we can terminate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here is it did a restart, for whatever reason, it shows to run the pre solver again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's I wouldn't spend a whole lot of time worrying about that, but it's a useful computational technique in many cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It again is adding cutting planes solving it adding cutting plane solving adding cutting plane solving it and Aha this point the bound in the best manager or the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's a zero percent gap it's in the previous one, it might, for some reason it looks like it was very close I don't know why it had that extra weirdness at the end, but once the gap got to zero, that means that we're done.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're trying to get the gap below point 0001 so when we get to the point, oh 1% or below we terminate and they found that optimal solution.
Karen Fireman: Thank you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sure yeah so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me give you a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I think I didn't give you this analogy before if I did I pardon me hopefully i'll do better, the second time, so my wife had a Ford bronco.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Early in our marriage and she occasionally, let me drive it to but under the hood everything that you are allowed to touch is penny yellow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, like you know the the the coolant the capricorn that was yellow dipstick yellow cap on that anything that wasn't yellow take it to the dealer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I just want to describe to you enough about the the solution log just to understand enough about how the algorithm works, so you can look at the log.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and get some idea of how the solution processes coming along right, so you have to know a little bit about cutting plans to know what's going on here in between these lines right and you need to kind of know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How the branch and bound algorithm that kind of framework of it is working to understand those things so i'm just teaching you the things that are painted yellow if it makes you feel good.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, so let me go back and show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How we go from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This to a slightly larger model because that certainly wouldn't qualify as a large model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, before we go there i'm going to do one more thing with it, that the instance and let's suppose that, for whatever reason, not reporting this to be a common occurrence that a furniture making problem suppose we were told that we get you either bed frames or bookcases but not both.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can model this, since we have these binary variable floating around by saying that the binary variable any product for bed frames.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the binary for bookcases some two at most one right, so we have two things, there are 01 this precludes the case where they're both one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So not both It could be that the sum is zero we don't make either one or one is one and the other one is zero right, and those are all Okay, but not both.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is an instance of what I call a logical constraint so typically a logical constraint will have coefficients for the decision variables that are very simple like a zero or one coefficient okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this This is something that we can do when we have binary variables around we can formulate these logical conditions and there's various other things that that we can do and we'll see some of them a little bit later on.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What I want to do as a step towards the model i'd like to show you next is to consider the case where I have two competing fixed costs so let's think of the X variable as something that we want to ship like we want to ship so many.
MS Analytics Class 2021: kegs of beer or whatever else is that we're shipping and we could either use the brown shipper not using any names here, or we could use the purple super.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whichever happens to be cheaper and it seems like it's obvious in this case that if we wanted to shift a little bit we'd use the brown shipper.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you want to ship a lot we use the purple shipper because they were comparing their fixed and variable costs there's like a breakeven points for them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if we're above that we use purple and we're blow that we use brown so in some sense, we want the model to choose that we don't want to have to look at the answer and say okay purple brown want the model to pick the appropriate costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if we just took our one fixed cost model and dislike kind of replicated the the season, the f's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Make it something that looks like this, and if we included this in a model, we would find that either.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It didn't use either ship, or if we had nothing or use both shippers, in the sense that it paid the fixed costs for both and the variable costs for both and that's not quite what we're trying to capture here, we want to capture a choice and not force it to use both.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that didn't work very well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It turns out that we can modify that just a little bit and get something that does work useful kind of a construct, and that is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To instead of saying use the purple shipper or the brown shipper and making it sound like it's a binary choice let's say let's split.
MS Analytics Class 2021: like King Solomon let's say let's let's split the the amount that we want to ship, we could send some of it on the brown shipper and some of it on the purple shipper.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Would you ever do that in in in real life.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You make a choice of which take upon the size order how fashion right where you might use one or the other, but I would argue that you'd never use both for one shipment high, because then you'd be paying both fixed costs, and that would never be to your advantage.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the model will ultimately choose one or the other but we kind of frame it as it can split the shipments between someone a purple shipper and someone the brown sugar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we attach the binary variable these new continuous y variables and that correctly models, the fixed costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then ultimately if we solve this, it would choose one or the other, because one is cheaper than the other, but we can also add in this kind of logical constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That says use one of the other but not both that might actually make it easier for the solver to come up with the answer to the model oftentimes will see this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is that one formulation will be correct, but another formulation that might have more inequalities might be more efficient, because you can kind of think of this as a cutting plane.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, even though they both model, the same situation, one of them cuts off more of the blue points, and so it will ultimately lead to a better solution strategy, so this turns out to be a correct way to model, the choice between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The brown shipper and the purple shipper.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And one of the things that's worth pointing out, is that we came out here with a bounded be think of it as being somewhere out here on the right right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can use a better bound for the brown sugar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: down here, but my what might be a bound on what's the most that you'd ship on the brown sugar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: crosses yeah this.
Karen Fireman: crossing point here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you could use that, in place of the other be now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With that make a difference.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again, is kind of like a cutting plan is that the bigger than be that we choose the more blue points we're allowing you know, on the boundary so please use the smaller be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're going to get a more efficient solution methodology Okay, so we might we might well choose this intermediate value for the bound for the brown sugar.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so I told you, I was going to use this idea to to get capture a larger integer linear programming model here's the model i'm going to look at and we'll see it tonight we'll also see it, a week from now you're slightly different guys.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going back to the trend shipment model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And for the most part in the trenches and model we used ground transportation, except for, as I pointed out until SAS completes the land bridge to Hawaii reusing Airfreight to get to Hawaii.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now why might that be it's possible that our shipping is not real time sensitive so we're not willing to pay a premium to get there faster than we need to we rather ship it take a little more time cheaper.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But what about if there's a deal now I love deals like that, like a bogo deals at the grocery store for something you'll never use I go for that every time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But let's say that one of the airlines is offering to discount shipping if we ship more than 500 units on a given flight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That might make it worth our while it might make the per unit shipping costs cheap enough that we can compete with ground right, so this is the cost structure that they have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah in real life is might not look like a smooth graph it might be more like a sawtooth graph or something where we have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Different intervals, where you have different rates but let's just suppose, for the sake of argument, this is the cost structure this, this would say that, up to 500 unit ships you just pay the normal per unit air freight costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So 500 units ship you pay for 500 units, but if you ship as much as 2000 you're only paying for 1200 so that's a 40% discount.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and the discount is like the more you ship, the more you save.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so there might be an incentive to ship and will assume a 2000 is the most that we can ship because of maybe the capacity on the on the plans that we're using for whatever reason.
MS Analytics Class 2021: contractual obligations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so if this is my shipping costs so it's linear up to 500 and then it's a smooth function from 500 to 2000, and this would multiply some kind of base there for a unit shipping costs, what kind of a model would that be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if it's ground it's just the usual unit shipping costs, but if it's air and we'll introduce a number of additional air routes that we can use, not just to and forth to Hawaii.
MS Analytics Class 2021: kind of a model would this be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Would it be a linear programming model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now look very linear to me, what does this look like to you.
Very nonlinear looks looks almost like it's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's like a logarithmic it's not linear, though.
MS Analytics Class 2021: shape, so this is a weird thing to be talking about in the chapter on mixed integer linear programming models and we haven't even talked about nonlinear models all really hardly since the first lecture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, even though in a straightforward formulation this model would be a nonlinear programming model i'm going to i'm going to talk about the following i'm going to say what if we approximate that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: By piece wise linear function series of mind yeah so, then this is pretty close this is not far off.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And what does this look like.
it'd be a series of lines that would apply between.
Karen Fireman: The between the unit ship, then it will be one equation between the second.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The second dialogue and the second equation, the third of four, so this is this far between this and this be one equation between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 700,000 it would be another equation, so we be a series of brackets yeah so what i'm thinking about is is it looks like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Except for instead of two shippers same ideas we could even though these aren't different shippers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can just interpret this as five different shippers like this is the brown shipper this the purple shipper and then this is the orange shipper and whatever you know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we could kind of treated in the same way that we treated the other other problem and just trying to model in just like extend that way of thinking to this situation okay.
Karen Fireman: It looks like this little or Simpsons integration model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah just just kind of look like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like like integration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then you kind of pass it a limited we're not going to pass the limit don't worry that's not get ahead of ourselves, in that way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're going to we're going to be willing to possibly make a slight error right, because if we choose the red line.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we're paying the black line might underestimate the true costs by a little bit so if we can optimize the approximate model, you might get a good solution, what we might not be capturing the optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that'll be a first good first step so here the variables i'm going to look at so numb ship.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's how much I want to go on this let's say this is a flight from it Jay so i'm going to break it down into number it's either like the wise This is like the X is the number ship.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The wiser than i'm in in the case is the five different shippers Okay, and the any in these the binaries.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, for a flight from it Jay I have an indicator binary variable each shipper so again, if I have five intervals, I think of them as five shippers, I have K going from one to five okay so before I had to now five.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me see how I would link these number, I called it, linking before same idea, but in this case it's going to be a little bit more complicated.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So remember the y one one plus y is equal to X now it's the sum of the number.
MS Analytics Class 2021: is equal to the number ship so it's like saying you can ship this amount over any of these five shippers break it up, however, you want.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But then each shipper if you ship them, you have to pay the fixed costs the any event is like disease, this is why is less than or equal to a value about time Z.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And these points are exactly from the graph has to be like the point for the fifth shipper for shipper third shipper second shipper first shipper just like what clay said about the intersection between the black the purple line in the in the brown line okay say my vm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this is a logical constraint that we say we just use one of those intervals, so this is just an extension of the idea of using the two shippers, but in the context of approximating a nonlinear cost structure by piece wise linear cost structure okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's let's see it in action.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to solve this nonlinear programming model approximately as a mixed integer linear programming model, and then the next last lecture will solve it as an nlp and we'll kind of compare the two solution approaches and see who wins.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Finally, here we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm looking sorry i'm in the wrong place i'm in libraries.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's us a trend shipment what we had before, but now it's MIT.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me start by showing you the data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's a larger data set because it has.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All those ground arcs and it also has some flight arcs so there's ground arcs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you go a little more than halfway down and see in SAS studio it only shows you rose one through 100 so I jumped to the end.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see that there are some air arcs here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not just between Hawaii.
MS Analytics Class 2021: between various cities, and this is a hub and spoke network Maybe you can figure out what airline, this is from looking at the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: hubs but any rate, you can see that there's a bunch of air arcs So those are the ones that are going to introduce new binary and continuous variables into the model to blow it up to make it much larger.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let me look at the model here again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The see that you see is the kind of cut off value for the nonlinear park less than 500 it's just strictly linear more than 500 for a flight you get the discounting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This 383 98 960 4.55.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do you remember seeing that before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that's looks like one of the one of the one of the earlier problem yeah so when we saw the trend shipment model which is this model with only flights to Hawaii we gotten injected value of 398 964.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're going to introduce that as a parameter that that says to the Mr LP solver we don't want to consider any solutions worse than that because we already know, a solution that achieves that, so why would we be interested in something works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: OK, so the arcs and nodes same as the trend shipment model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This declaration of the set flights just picks off the arcs that correspond to flex so when the mode is air that's a flight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We want that set because, for the flights, we need to do something special for the ground transportation it's just business as usual.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay here i'm reading in the file Interpol it's not police work here it's just interpolation So if I go into the file to show it to you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: triple.
MS Analytics Class 2021: itself it's just those points the breakpoints between the different segments zero to 500 500 to 700 so interpolating points.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this is set up in a way that if we try, if we decided to add another interpolating point or change the value of interpolating point our model would still do the approximation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so going back into friendship and problem, it would probably break up they're not the correct word.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, although we could do some pre processing and data cleaning checking using a data set or something like that right it's a good point to make so let's just run it down oh.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to shy away from using interactive mode i've been burned too many times by.
MS Analytics Class 2021: sasa were 14.3 and says to do 3.7.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm gonna run the whole thing and go back and look at this, but this is just going to calculate the equations of all those lines, the slopes in the intercepts because i'm going to need to use those in my objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's uh let's go on down here, reading the data sets so here's my variables, I have my number of variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And for the flights, I also have the y variables, the nominees and the any events, and you can see one to N, and in this case is five, but again it's it's written flexibly, so that I could add extra interpolating points, if I wanted a better approximation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so I have these what i'm calling linking constraints I have, I have broken them down into a logical constraint, a linking constraint and Upper for a variable upper bound constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: My objectives, and let me see if I can get us a little more space here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That should do it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have to, I have the total cost, which is calculated using the linear piece wise linear thing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it uses the decision variables any into numb and there's the intercept times any and plus the slope times not meant no mentors, that is, the why variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The nlp cost is the actual costs from that curve i'm using the equation of that curve and we kind of noticed that it was kind of a logarithmic looking thing, and you can see the logarithms in the equation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You probably, in practice, even if they gave you a graph they wouldn't like give you a function.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, but here i'm just i'm pretending that I have it and i'm calculating it why Why do I need to objectives well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to optimize using total cost, but when i'm done, I have to pay nlp costs because that's the actual cost of shipping right i'm using the total cost as an approximation to try and get a good solution, but I still have to pay the price they're charging for shipping.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so i'm going to say solve lbj total costs to use the piece was linear one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With Mr LP so I can say solver options in my option is cut off at the LP costs and talked about that briefly at the top right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when i'm done the total cost will be in the solution summary table the nlp costs when I print it, then we can compare and see how close they are right, because it's not exactly, but it should be close.
MS Analytics Class 2021: print the flights, because i'm expecting i'm not going to use a whole lot of flights.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because they were more expensive to begin with the discounting is not going to make you want to use all flights, but it's going to be less than the total solution, but if I want to do something, where I can create a data set with the whole solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so i'm going to run it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it could take longer to solve because it's a medium scale and my LP.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is very exciting to think how much more exciting, it would be if it didn't have the spinning wheel, then you just have no idea.
MS Analytics Class 2021: will be able to see the log file when it's done.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Should we take our break here right, this is a little mysterious because you don't know how long it's going to take, and I don't know how long it's going to take because i'm used to running it on a different version of SAS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You will thank you, but no, no, no, I don't think it's gonna take that long i'm just trying to make small talk.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's let's pretend that we were doing this right and let's look and see how big the problem is the problem summary so 5000 variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 3000 binary variables okay so it's a decent chunk.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there's our answer so 397 847 so seems like it's better by about 1000.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In terms of the LP solution did it solve the problem to optimize it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and find an optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, within relative gap means that it didn't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Quite make it all the way and if we look at the gap, the absolute gap so it's within $34 of optimizing the piece was linear part which is pretty close relative to this this here and it's less than point oh 1.01%.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's see here and the true nlp cost is 390 8048.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so it's that's bigger than the objective value, because this is an approximation right but it's still goods as a better solution than the LP solution and it's using these flights.
MS Analytics Class 2021: right here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's see what if we wanted to get the optimal solution, even though this is a larger model let's say we say damn the torpedoes we want the optimal solution, how can we tell it to keep going so if we look at the gap here it's point oh eight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The parameter that says how small, it has to get as that rel of gap, so if we were to go into the code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and say, in addition to the cutoff will say rel.
MS Analytics Class 2021: gap, and we should choose something smaller than we had before, so what we could do is like I think like something like one E minus 610 to the minus six is smaller right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, then it'll keep going.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Unfortunately, it will keep going, but we have to start from the beginning, so it's going to take a little bit longer so let's try this one he minus six oh yeah that's right when he minus six that would have run much faster.
MS Analytics Class 2021: sorry about that and so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm trying to think what that might mean physically in just that just making sure that the gap is even smaller than it was before it, so it might not find a better solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it if it doesn't find a better solution will find a better bound, and so we can will be provably closer to finding the optimal solution might not indeed finding optimal solution we might have to choose a smaller value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But let's not just stand around talking about let's try and see if it works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So regardless it'll find a smaller gap, because we set the relative objective gap smaller than the gap was able to achieve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it's going to like do the work that it did to get like 47 seconds and then it's going to have to work a little more.
wouldn't be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Trying to think if you added more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: More bars, you know we split into four four or five.
MS Analytics Class 2021: More seconds, then it would be a better approximation, but it would like to take longer to solve, because we have more integer variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that might that might narrow the gap between the Mr LP objective and the nlp objective because it'd be a better approximation so let's see if we actually got an optimal solution, this time, and we might might not let's see we did hey.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And is it any different let's see a 397 847 looks like it may be the same solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just possible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is this is more like as exciting, it is, as it is to solve larger scale and my lps.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay questions about this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I want to, I want to finish off by talking about the vehicle routing model that is going to be similar to your project two years will perk up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the in the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the in the folder for the lecture I also gave you a PDF.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That talks about this specific problem kind of like an extension of the course notes, because this example is not part of the course notes, so if you want to follow along in that and you're welcome to, but I have slides for it as well.
Okay, let me see questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: kind of kind of questions alright so here's this is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: me, let me start, let me say this way, there is, I told you about the math programming user's guide right, it has more technical details about pocket model and the solvers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's also assessed publication called math programming examples which has a couple dozen examples of different types of optimization models.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of which is the model that I want to talk about next all right, although i've i've tried to simplify some of the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some of the model, a little bit, but it's very similar to what's in that book, this is a good reference to use in case you want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me go learn a little bit more about pocket model syntax let me look for models that are similar to what I might see it works if there's anything that I could kind of transfer to my my situation, but in this case the setting is the following.
MS Analytics Class 2021: People.
MS Analytics Class 2021: lose their bags or their flight comes in and their bags are missing, and they come in, in a later flight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, at Heathrow airport in London, they have bags that they need to deliver or drop off to various customer locations, you know, like their home or their hotel or something like that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so the company is going to use these vans to pick up the baggage at 6pm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the contract says they have to deliver all the bags by 8pm step two hour time window to deliver all the luggage so depending on how many bags, there are and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the sake of this problem, because the capacity of the vans is quite large.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're just going to look at the locations and not worry too much about how many bags are there might be like two to four bags for location, but they can all fit in the van the real trick is getting them all delivered by the two hour time window.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it might not be possible to deliver all of the luggage in one van.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In fact, using these locations and the times the transit times between the locations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One van can't do it in two hours, it would take almost three hours for one band to do it, and that was not satisfy their contractual obligations they're going to have to use to this right, so the question is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: what's the earliest, the two bands can deliver all the bags and it might or might not be within two hours either you might have to go to three events, I mean ultimately.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we've got six vans we're going to be able to do it it's a question of how many bands, that we need to use alright.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're going to just consider the problem of what's the earliest, the two vans can deliver all the bags, and so you can see that there's two routes for two vans.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the first van might go to to from Heathrow to heroin Ealing to kingston the sudden to Bromley to Greenwich to dartford.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it gets the dark for maybe in less than two hours it doesn't matter how long it takes to go from Darfur back to Heathrow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: because all the bags have been delivered in the in the time window supposedly so we want to see what's the earliest that two bands can deliver all the bags.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then see if it's within the to what the two hour time window otherwise may have to crank it up to three events and solve a similar problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's a it's an instance of what we typically call a vehicle routing problem.
Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It turns out that these two if you competed the times for these turn out to be less than two hours, I want to kind of spoil the surprise, yes it is less than two hours.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The larger these two lengths of these pads from Heathrow to some other other place.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If if our objective is the earliest that they can deliver the two bags, the objective has a special name it's called the make span.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which is the time of the longest van what's the time it takes to the Van the last band to finish delivering.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so the question could be rephrased, as is the make span for two vans within 120 minutes Okay, so when we actually do the model will be looking at our objective is to make span.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to look at kind of what some decision variables might be for this model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what do I have to decide, I have to decide for each location which van is going to deliver the bags to that location okay so let's call that use node.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there's in this case, two vehicles say vehicle one and vehicle to and use node for hero for vehicle one says his vehicle one delivering to heroin this case, the answer be yes one it's one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whereas for the the blue van if that's van number two or vehicle to use note of hero for vehicle to our event to is zero because that van doesn't deliver the hero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that us know just says Okay, which vehicle goes to that node right so binary decision variable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it's only kind of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: gives the Van the list of locations, is going to deliver to it doesn't say what the order is that they're going to deliver them to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The US art variables says, for a particular Arc and an Arc is like from Heathrow to his linkedin from Heathrow to kingston from Heathrow to Bromley from Bromley a will rich it's every pair of nodes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is that are used by vehicle one is that are used by vehicle to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so these use art variables are kind of like the variables that we used in the transportation model and the trend shipment model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The num ship variables, except for their per vehicle and, if you look at what a path looks like it's going to be either zero or one either use it, or we don't use it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So these are all binary decision variables and how many decision variables, are we going to have well if we have let's see 123456 I think we have 14 deliveries that we have to do from Heathrow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the US node would be 14 times to 28 but the US Arc would be two times, all the arrows connecting 15 different nodes to be like 15 times 14 times to that's quite a bit larger right, because every Arc is pick a pick and pick a place that it goes from one place that he goes to OK.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So those are our decision variables now, what about constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here are some constraints and what i'm thinking of here is i'm looking at this picture and trying to figure out what has to be true about.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The relationship between these variables and, as I alluded to before it's it's like a network model it's just a simple network model where everything is just either use or not use zero or one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what I mean by a node coverage constraint would say pick a delivery node like barking.
MS Analytics Class 2021: He has to get delivered to buy your vehicle one or vehicle to those the only choices right some vehicle has to service that note, so that node has to be covered so that would just be a logical constraint that says one binary variable plus another binary variable is one okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The flow conservation is basically similar to what we saw before which says that will look at the pads if the if the red vehicle goes to hero, so if you use node is one for that that node and it has to come in once and go out once.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That makes sense.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To go in and you have to go out and that's true for all of them even Darfur, although we don't really count the return to the base.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't show it in the picture, because it doesn't enter into the objective, but you can think of it as if you saw that noted be kind of like a cycle or route.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So everything we visit we go in, let me go out and so how can I express that using the binary variable so I could say the sum of all the variables going in or the flow in is equal to the use node.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's either one if I use it or zero if I don't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so these are kind of the network constraints that I had before flow conservation so i'm using the same kind of name.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So these are great variables, and these are all good constraints so let's say we we type away and we figured out what we're going to do we solve the model and something like this happens oops.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this solution satisfies all those conditions every node gets visit by at least one vehicle the red, one of the or the blue one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For every node either go in or out once.
MS Analytics Class 2021: From harrell I would go back to Heathrow and from sudden I would go back to Heathrow i'm just not showing those but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Unless these British bands are like driven by doctor my doctor who, this is not going to work right because you can't go from here to here and then go back in time and go around here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's just about physically possible So these are called sub tours and these are no known, but these are these are a solution to our constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, in some sense we just like Oh, we left out some constraints need to add in a constraint that says you can't do this so let's look at this little sub tour here, these five locations and i'm going to show you or describe to you a constraint that eliminates that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I visit if us notice one for one of the nodes in that in that little area, then I have to use some Arc that goes from outside to inside.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In other words, if i'm going to pick if i'm going to drop off a bag and holborn.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have to drive there, I have to get there, somehow, and one of the arcs on my path is going to have to go from inside from outside to inside like it's outside outside outside inside okay that's the art.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it forces me if i'm going to service this with vehicle one to use some art that goes in So you can see the previous solution violated that it visited holborn but it didn't go in there from outside, so the sum of all the arcs going in is zero and yet holborn is one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that would violate this constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so this is called a sub tour elimination constraint basically because eliminates a sub tour right So if I added this constraint in for this area and for holborn and probably how we want to add the same constraint in for his linkedin for Ealing for Hammersmith and Battersea.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because the the basically the same, I want to make sure that I don't do one of those other silly things I might get a solution that looks like this, when I re optimize well now i'm going from outside to inside.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To go to holborn is linked into Battersea but at the same time it doesn't quite work because there's another one of these things.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But, moreover, what about van number two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Adding this constraint in kind of forced some action on the red route, but it didn't help with the blue one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, probably what I should have done is I should have said okay Well, this is a sub tour to I should add, in a constraint that eliminates this sub tour for the blue van.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and add all the ones in for the red band for here and in case I don't want to have just a switcheroo between the red and blue vans I should do all these for the blue van and all these for the red van.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then I can make sure that I don't have either these sub tours whenever we optimize OK, so the way that this approach works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: is called constraint generation Okay, and I apologize for the in the right up I used.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So typical in in optimization parlance, this would typically be called the master problem but we're trying to move away from those types of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: uses of that word so i'm calling it the primary problem I just didn't change it in the in the original lineup so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The primary problem solves this binary integer programming model with all the known sub tours.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we may not know them all, so if we if we wanted to generate the mall how many would that be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A lot.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is think about how many of them there are so for every subset.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of the delivery knows it's a lot of subsets that's like two to the 14th power times two vans plans, however many nodes are in each one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is a lot and in the right up, I think I actually knew right how many there are there are a lot, and so, if we enumerated the mall our model would be so big that it would take a long time to solve, because the time for iteration would be enormous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what we do is, we hope that if we generate them on the fly.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That we won't need very many of them, so what we do is, we have some sub tours that we've already added we solve that sub problem we get a solution that looks like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then we find all of the sub tours like here's one Ealing and Hammersmith and here's another one barking will rich Greenwich dartford Bromley and we add in the sub tour elimination constraints to get rid of those two sub tours and then we go back and we sell the primary problem again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it might find actual bonafide routes or it might find more sub tours so every time we solve the primary problem and we find sub tours we add them in and we resolve the primary problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so we may have to solve it over and over again, generating additional constraints until we get a feasible solution to the problem that we want to solve vehicle routing problem okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this is actually.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of a kind of a pair of of of techniques that are used to solve large scale problems, this is called constraint generation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because we generate constraints as we discovered that they're violated by the solution there's a kind of a sister technique called it's like a variable generation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where we generate additional variables in order to solve a hard problem we don't solve the problem with all the variables that's the approach that they use to solve those hard problems in the airline industry of assigning.
MS Analytics Class 2021: crews to planes and planes to flight lights.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me show you this in action.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is called it's in the the data for for for lesson for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Spot called baggage delivering.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's set up so that you can solve the problem for any number of vehicles, and although you wouldn't really care to change the depot Heathrow is just set up as something called depot in case you had different data and it didn't involve Heathrow Airport.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I have one to number of vehicles different vehicles, I have nodes which i'll read from a data set and then I have what i'm going to call the delivery nodes which is everything except the depot okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me show you the data set for this called delivery data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it has the locations and the the travel times between them, so this says that to get from Heathrow to heroin takes 20 minutes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And these are in this simple model assumed to be symmetric So if I wanted to go from here to Heathrow it's also 20 minutes, so this, these are all the transit times between all the locations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i've also got the locations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: longitude and latitude, if you will, although the Earth is not very curt curved around London is basically flat those ones like X and y coordinates so i'm gonna show you some pictures, like the ones that were in the slides.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's go back to the model here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm reading in the the the north and the West and the travel time for the arcs initially the arcs are going to be all of the pairs of nose.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so nodes cross nodes crosses the Cross buttock operator in profit model so like if if he throws one node and Bromley is another node then he told a Bromley is now, instead of arts i'm going to read the data in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here i've got all the data right in because i'm only interested in the time to the last delivery i'm going to replace the travel times back to the depot by zeros so it just basically doesn't count that time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to take all the loops out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the arcs also contain like a loop from Heathrow to itself.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That doesn't make sense that you would use any of those in a route so i'm just going to take them out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So arcs is the arcs taking away the set of loops and i'll print the travel times so you can see what that matrix looks like here's my use node and use our variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The Max time used is variable i'm going to use to calculate the make span.
MS Analytics Class 2021: My implicit variables here i've got the number of stops on each route.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see on calculating the number of stops it's just the sum of the use node variables over the delivery knows, so if I delivered to a node that's a stop, so this is counts the total number of stops.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Time us i'm adding up the travel time over all the arcs using the use art variables for a particular vehicle.
MS Analytics Class 2021: flow in and flow out are defined in the same way that I did for the trend shipment problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what am I constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The node coverage have gone down a little bit too far.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, no covered says that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For each delivery node.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The summer the vehicles, the US nodes is one that means for each delivery node exactly one van makes a delivery to that note.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's a logical constraint and that's What if that's how you can interpret it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The flow balance constraints say that if I use the note, I have to go in, if I use the note, I have to go out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And because this problem is has some symmetry to it, what do I mean by that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say we got a solution that uses two bands, I can think of one is the red van and what does the blue band.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But I could take them in for new paint jobs and paste the red van blue and the blue and red and assign them to the opposite routes and that's exactly as good as solution, because the bands are indistinguishable every solution corresponds to another solution that uses the other bands.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I can eliminate that by saying, as a symmetry breaker van one makes more sense than van to it just helps solve the problem to you include the cemetery breaker.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here's the may expand constrain it says that the maximum time us is at least as big as any of the times of any of the bands.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So basically it says that next time used is going to be the maximum of the time use for vehicle one and the time use for vehicle to.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that's my model, the rest of it is just all this mess about the sub tours.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to start off with.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A very simple sub tour, which is just all the delivery notes Okay, and nothing else, and then it says.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is the sub tour elimination constraint, which I describe.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm optimizing to make span.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The rest of it is is basically just finding the sub tours, so I do, I do have kind of a loop.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Over solving the primary problem that says until each vehicles routers connected i'm going to solve the primary model look at the solution find the sub tours add them to the model optimize it again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If all the routes are connected then i'm done solving it, otherwise I get the sub tours Adam back in re optimize.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the rest of the model is is basically just all about the sub tours.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me Let me run this and show you how it works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, unfortunately I can't page in the log file until it's finished, so let me let it get a chance to finish here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so this is the distance the transit time or distance matrix for the for the route.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then I start solving the problems, let me go into the log file to show you the problems as their self.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, reading the data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here it's solving.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There we go Okay, so the first model that it solves is an ml and I op to see the solution log for them, I LP it finds a solution with objective value at night, what does that mean that means that both of the vans can deliver all the bags in 89 minutes okay that's great except for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's a bunch of Sub points right, and if we were looking at the solution, the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the first.
MS Analytics Class 2021: iteration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is a picture of all of the routes, a lot of time traveling going on here right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And even though they can deliver the bags really quickly it's not physically possible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what happens is, these are all the sub tours and if you compare these two those two pictures.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Every every pair that's connected with a line it has an arrow on both sides is represented by a sub tour here so Those are all added in so the new solution is going to have to avoid all those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's see what happens in the second problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well it's all done in my okie.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's going up right because we, when we throw out those points from being feasible than it's going to take longer to do the deliveries.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we can look at the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here's the second 194, as I said.
MS Analytics Class 2021: looks like real close right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The blue one is an actual route and the red one only has this little dinky little sub to her here, so you might think oh next time we're done well let's see so So if you look at the two bands.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is the number of stops how long it takes in minutes, and this is the other components, we talked about components, when we talked about the finding the networks right and so number of disconnected pieces okay so let's go back to the log.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we added that one solves the other primary problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, again, if you look at the objective here it's it's getting a little bigger it's 96 but it's found more sub tours.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's just stick to the results now until we finish solving so here here's the one that has 96.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh it's kind of a mess again right, and so the time is going up, but we still have sub tours so we throw the other those sub towards in solve it again 98.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe we're getting closer here, this is the picture I showed you before to demonstrate the sub tours right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Each one has two components to disconnected peaches peaches peaches, we add those in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now it's got a got one objective value 100.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And Lo and behold there bonafide Okay, they both have one component so most of the code that we skipped over it's just finding the components it's not.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Useful doesn't teach you anything about optimization but you're going to need that code when you do your project Okay, so you just going to have to kind of basically modify this model to solve that other setting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the the the kind of mechanism is there, and so you can see that there's two routes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And they both get done within 100 minutes, so this solution has a make span of 100.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it turns out that that's the best, how do we know it's the best well it's feasible.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and satisfies all the constraints, so we could add all the other constraints and it wouldn't it wouldn't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: do anything to cut this out, this is the best solution to this problem, so we, the best solution to the sub solutions, all this, the Center so let's look at back at the log file so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's probably you know, hundreds of thousands of those constraints, how many do we have to add in to solve the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's go back to the lesson we had 13.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the the problems the models that we're solving are much smaller than they could be if we just tried this to throw them all and mass.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you curious here, there is a file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's two versions of of the Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We go back into the files and folders here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So weird I pick out less than four.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's two that are very close names here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah so one is called baggage delivery and the other one's called baggage delivery svg if we use the svg it would it would generate a file called bd svg me open that up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because this is what I got when I ran it before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I want to open this let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: me try and open this should open as a browser okay i'll do an eye is fine.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's a movie watch, so let me just hit play.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Why is it not going to be going here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's not a very good movie.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's see we're trying to open up in a different browser and try, one more time let's see i'm actually saying it display the individual images yeah it was so it should actually page through all those diagrams one of the time when we just try and open it once more time see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This cool little window it's like an open with.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like giving me a choice, I think I go into the file itself and open it, you can see that, let me.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't know why that's not working.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, let me try real quick to see if I can get to it see.
Karen Fireman: If you do a save as it works, you can just Double Click it just save as like to your desktop and Double Click it it works is the movie okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm gonna try that so you're saying I should go into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here and save as.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where where do you mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah options here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't think I see that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me just quickly try my way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so i'm just going to go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's go to the desktop.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And not sure I can't get to it see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of course data for demos.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Open with okay let's try something a little bit.
Karen Fireman: I can just share my screen again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I think I got this let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Come on firefox firefox.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, here we go whoops I had it there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, wearing this is chrome right now right so here let's try.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh fabulous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So with that program you can make a movie, just in case you're curious because it may be that when you solve the project, you want to make a movie So you can see how it's doing just the code is very similar just creates the that file.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let me stop there, and i'll take any questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe that it's just too new at this point that you don't know what the questions are that you want to ask.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as I suggested, if you read the rate up for the project.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And what i'm encouraging you first is just to get to the point where you can read the data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In populate parameter raise but at any point, while you're working on it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i've given you the parameters for data sets that you can send to me as kind of like a test.
MS Analytics Class 2021: run your data sets and a test program need to look at the routes and kind of make sure they're connected and count the number of stops and the time and so forth, so if they're not bonafide routes, I can tell you what's wrong.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So hopefully that will give you all the tools that you need for that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The next lecture is going to be about nonlinear programming models it's certainly not on the test there's not a homework for the last lesson, so this week's homework, will be the last homework.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But I realized that some of life is not linear so you probably should be exposed to some of those methods to but we see if there's any questions, oh no one star on will be quality.
MS Analytics Class 2021: tomatoes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I there was a question that I don't understand from shouting you wanna you want to try and ask you a question out loud, so I can.
I can.
Shadi Kilani: Know that's always just kind of describing when you were talking about the nodes I said that each node needs to have a note before it you can't just have the auto appeared out of nowhere, I was just making a comment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so you're just saying what what kind of constraints might be appropriate to describe the solution okay good.
Shadi Kilani: To participate in my own race.
MS Analytics Class 2021: will give you four stars to that.
Shadi Kilani: Oh, thank you, I appreciate that Thank you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Any other any other questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like I said, if you want to the right of that I shared the PDF file is explains this as a DEMO also includes code and tries to kind of break the code apart into what part is just jarring the graphs and what part is actually doing the work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the part that you love to modify is not the part that looks like it's jibberish.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You don't have to worry about the jibberish.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So two bands is enough.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is a story yeah if you wanted to see three bands, though, you could do that you know it's not like it would be less, but the same process for vans, five and six fans yeah you have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: a premiere at the top yeah so you could just change that right yeah and then maybe different colors what can use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A I think everyone out of colors I think the seventh one is black and so's the H1 so wouldn't be very exciting but yeah you couldn't do that yeah that you have to really increase.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But they only have six bands so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Only have six.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay well if there's no questions we are done a little bit over but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Getting out before 930 so that's a blessing there.
Amanda Pham: Thank you, Dr hartman.
Charles Swanson: All right.
Karen Fireman: Thank you, Dr hartman Thank you, thank you very much.